In honor of the veterans who have served our country, both past and present, First National Bank, a Franklin family community bank, proudly sponsors Veterans of the Valley.
Since 1862, First National has provided local decision-making and accessibility, as well as banking products and services to Brazos Valley citizens.
[Music.]
Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
Imagine having fought World War II without the B-25 bomber, or in the case of the plane that Dan Chadbourne served in, the PBJ B-25 Mitchell.
It was loud, it was crowded, but it was a warrior of an aircraft that gained much of its fame as the transport for Jimmy Doolittle's 1942 raid on Tokyo.
Marine Dan Chadbourne O'Brien didn't get his first wish, that was to be a tail gunner on an SVT Dauntless, but rather became a radio gunner on the B-25, flying 38 missions in the Pacific Theater from February to September of 1945.
His 443rd Marine Bombing Squadron would strafe and bomb and even serve as an escort for the fighters of the 1st Marine Wing to the invasion of Okinawa.
That's Operation Iceberg.
His is a fascinating story of service in World War II.
Please welcome Marine Flyer Dan Chadbourne.
Dan, welcome.
It's great to have you here on the show.
You nearly had to go into the Navy or the Army, but you had some corrective surgery so that you could get your wish of going into the Marines.
Talk about that.
I probably would have gone in in the end of December of 42.
And at that time, the options were open to be able to go into the Marine Corps, but after
making some preliminary inquiries there.
They told me I would have to have that selective surgery done first.
Right.
So that delayed me into the spring of, uh, 43 of getting in there.
But, uh, I, I finally had to go down and be drafted in order to be, because they'd closed the enlistments with the Marines at that time.
Right.
And I had to be drafted.
So when I did and they got me up there to,
to put me in the service, they gave me an option of going into Marines or into the, not into the Marines, into the Navy or the Army.
Right.
And I kept telling them, no, I was supposed to go into the Marine Corps and explained that they had closed the enlistments.
Well, we can't do it.
So I produced a letter from the doctor.
They did the corrective surgery.
Right.
And some old salty Marine sergeant and some others went off in a corner
and talked a few minutes and came back and said, OK, we're going to put you in the Marine Corps.
So in spite of having to go into the Army or the Navy, I ended up in the Marine Corps.
Wish granted.
That's great.
What was your fascination with the SBD Dauntless?
You wanted to be a tail gunner there.
Well, it just looked like an exciting thing to do.
And if you look at any of the old films of the SBDs bombing on the Japanese, it was
pretty tough because you're coming straight down and you had air brakes to keep you from going into the ship.
And it was pretty bad because after we started flying in a B-25, then you were doing more horizontal flying and you were trying to come straight down on a smokestack in one of those SBDs.
Right, right.
You ended up...
working radio and a gunner, and the 443rd Marine that you joined up in Cherry Point, North Carolina.
So sort of take us there and then on into the service.
Well, I actually started out in another air group prior to that, which was 416, and we did most of the training at Cherry Point and then down in Boca Chica, Florida.
And when we got near the end of that training, well, they took parts of our group
and shipped us overseas as replacement in this 443.
And we had a brand new airplane with all the new features on it.
And we got out on the west coast and they put a belly tank in that bomber so it could make it to Hawaii.
And we had to take all the armament off the plane.
So we took it off and crated it.
And two of us ended up having to escort the crates of stuff out to the island.
So we flipped a coin and another guy and myself ended up going on ship.
Well, the rest of them flew up to Seattle and finally made it there.
But by the time they got to the islands out where we were, we were already assigned and in business.
So they came flying in there about two months later.
And we said, where have you been?
Well, they wined and dined up in California, but we were already getting points on the ground out there where we were.
There was a point in your training, I believe, that you jumped, right?
Yeah.
Yeah, a free fall parachute jump.
Yeah, that was in training because they sent us down to Camp Lejeune where they trained the paratroopers.
Right.
And they made you do the free fall.
And first, it made you do all the jumping off platforms and landing correctly where you didn't break your neck.
But it was required that you had to make one free fall.
And it was interesting.
Yeah, I bet it was.
You didn't need that training in your service as it turned out later on.
No, unfortunately, we didn't need you.
That was good.
You were sent to the South Pacific in 1944 as a waste gunner.
Talk about the bombing missions and sort of the nature of your bombing missions and what you did.
Well, we were in what was called the Solomon Islands, and I was on a little island called Emeru, which was the 150th meridian, about three degrees below the equator.
And we bombed basically New Britain and New Ireland.
And Ribaul Harbor was a staunch,
of naval base for the Japanese.
And Kaviyang was another out at the end of the island of New Island.
It was the easiest for us to get to.
So if we went on a bombing run that was designed to drop bombs at Rebaal and got down and the weather was bad and you couldn't see to drop the bombs,
Well, they were always a secondary target on the way home, so you'd drop everything on them before you'd drop it into the ocean.
I see.
So you had a primary target and a secondary target.
Primary and secondary targets, and you always had those any time you flew.
And you had to understand that there was no such things as radar in those days, weather radars or anything else.
And I think I was telling you that we went
One air flight, what happened in the morning before you were ready to go on a bombing mission, they would send one airplane down with all the meteorologists to the area where you were going to go.
And he would read the weather and encode it.
And as a radio operator, you got to send it on what was called a Fox schedule, where it was sent out on the air twice with no response.
so that the people on the ground that were getting ready to come bomb, not just our island, but there were some other islands that had planes that put over the same target, would monitor it, and they would interpolate whether they would be ready to fly.
If it was good weather, you'd pass the group going to the bombing thing, and you'd be coming home.
You didn't do any bombing that time.
You just went down and surveyed the weather.
came back but that didn't count as a bomb and run in the deal but it was interesting because it was one of the few times that a radio operator really got to do anything over distance because you were transmitting over several hundred miles in all directions and they were monitoring it and they took your data that you sent
decoded it and used it to be able to go back and forth.
But they did that every day.
I didn't do them on a daily basis, but I did get to do that a few times.
The nature of your missions I know varied.
The plane would normally fly at a maximum of what, 10,000 to 12,000 feet?
Most of our medium bombing was from about 10,000 to 12,000 feet.
And there was a reason for that.
A PBJ didn't have much ceiling, much beyond that going up.
You could go up to maybe 15 or 17.
You couldn't stay there.
You had to fly at an effective rate.
They were done from about 10,000 to 12,000 feet.
I see.
And then part of the time when we did low-level bombing, it came in off the water and you raised up long enough to get over the trees.
And you would drop anti-personnel bombs that had a delayed fuse so that
When it bounced off the ground and came back up under the plane, it looked like you were going to get blown off, but it didn't.
It had an 11-second fuse that gave you a chance to get further away from the bomb.
Right.
And these were in your strafing exercises, your strafing missions, right?
Yeah.
When you were strafing bivouac areas or you were doing roads where they would have vehicles on the highway,
And you were only about 100 feet off the ground here at this time.
You barely cleaned the top of the tree.
Right, right.
So not even that far.
You weren't doing very far.
Not very high at all.
Talk about the time that your engine got knocked out.
There was fuel.
Well, we were doing a medium bomb in that time.
And we were just coming off the target and got one engine hit.
And gasoline started pouring into the back of the plane.
We called up front and said, hey, are we ready to leave?
And he said, no, if we haven't blown up yet, just turn all the electrical gear off, and we'll drop out and fly home on one engine.
So that was basically what we did.
And in doing so, they assigned one of the other planes to fly wing with you to get back to the base area.
And we landed with all the meat wagons out there waiting on you and no problem.
We didn't have any problem.
It landed okay with one engine.
You turned out to be a heck of a pilot.
Yeah.
Talk about the mission that I referred to in the opening where you helped move the first Marine Air Wing into Okinawa for the invasion.
When the invasion of Okinawa began, the first Marine Air Wing was still down in the South Pacific.
And they were a fighter outfit, F4Us.
And they had no navigational facilities over long distances.
So they assigned four planes to each bomber, two under each wing.
And we took them through the end of New Guinea, up through Lady Gulf, and up to Clark Field in Luzon.
Right.
And we ferried the plane from there into Katrina Air Base, I guess it was, at Okinawa.
And they flew wing on us all the way back and forth, up there.
We didn't bring them back.
No.
You described the scene at Okinawa as the... Well, when we landed... The boats in the water.
Huh?
Oh, the ships in the water.
Yeah.
Well, when we first got close enough to...
where we were headed at Okinawa looking down while we could see the battle wagons all firing onto the shore up there shelling the lower end of that island and in distance as far as you could see in any direction were ships and there were battleships, navy ships, cargo ships, you name it and they were all separated so that the Japanese couldn't knock them all down at one time.
And when we landed, well, there's two old Marines were pitching horseshoes there by the airstrip, and I said, you're not worried with all the sirens going off?
He said, no.
He said, they're trying to bomb these things out in the ocean out here, these ships.
They're trying to sink the ships.
So every ship out there had armament on it, and they were all firing at these kamikazes coming down into the
try and make it to the ships, but most of them never ever hit anything but the water.
Exactly, exactly.
But it was kind of weird.
Yeah.
That must have been quite a sight, because at this time, as you said, you're talking about the kamikazes, this was, as you described it, sort of a desperate time in the war.
It was.
Well, they were already down, excuse me, to the end, and were having a hard time surviving with anything.
If they hadn't have dropped the atomic bombs by, then the invasion would have come along after that in place of it.
Right, right.
Talk about the B-25.
We're going to see some photos here in a little bit, but the B-25 and the PBJ, as you call it, and the aircraft itself, you talked about how loud it was.
It was very crowded, but it was a dependable aircraft, wasn't it?
It was very good.
It had two right cyclone engines, and you had a straight stack, which meant that
the power came straight out of that thing and it was the noisiest airplane you could ever fly in, I'm sure.
Right.
And your ears would ring after you got back on the ground.
But it was a very versatile plane and very dependable.
Well, that's the reason that Doolittle used it for the raids, obviously, to get off of the Hornet so fast as it did.
Yeah.
He did a good thing of getting that thing off an aircraft carrier because it took some distance to get one of those things up in the air.
And I think I told you that the airstrip we worked off on was a plateau about 200 feet up in the air.
And you could go offloaded and if you dipped a little bit going off the end, you still had enough airspeed to
pick up without falling off in the water.
Right, right.
But same token, if you came in short on the other end of that air strip, you hit the side of the mountain.
Hit the side of the mountain, right.
But the B-25 was probably one of the few aircrafts that could do that, that could pull that off.
Yeah, it was really, I think the Marines maybe had, well, in the Pacific, they only had about five or six squadrons.
They didn't have a whole hell of a lot of them.
Right.
There were much more than that that were in training over the years, but that basically was what most of them were.
Exactly.
Let's go ahead and go to those photographs that we talked about right now.
These are some pictures that Dan supplied us.
There's a young cowboy.
It must have been.
You look like you're about, what, about four years old?
I guess.
I don't remember it.
No, I wouldn't expect that you would.
My wife dug that picture up somewhere.
I just thought it was cute.
We ought to use it.
Well, in those days, they'd bring the horse around to the neighborhood and they'd
photograph you sitting on the horse, and then they'd move on to where some other kids were.
That's right.
And they'd sell you the picture.
Yeah, they'd sell you the picture.
Well, I'll tell you what, they did that when my kids were young, too.
So that's been a business for a long time.
It's a good business.
Okay, let's move on.
What a great picture that I think this is.
I don't know where that was made.
Well, it was obviously, you were a young Marine.
I was still in the service somewhere.
Right, right.
That's a sharp-looking Marine there.
It really is.
It's a good-looking picture.
Now, this outfit.
Okay, these were, I'm the second one from the right on the bottom down here.
And these were replacements for the people that either got killed or were shipped back somewhere else.
These were all airmen that were various amounts of things on there.
We carried seven people on a B-25 on this PBJ.
I never told you that, but that was how many
That was the crew.
People flew on it.
Yeah.
And when we up in Clark Field in Luzon, they were looking at a B-24.
They were bombing Formosa in the middle of the night, night hecklers.
And the Army guys kept saying, well, you don't have in that plane the stuff we've got in ours.
So I said, they started naming off all the electronic gear they had.
And I said, we got that.
We got that.
And he said, there's no way you could get all that in that airplane.
Yeah.
So they came and looked.
They said, we got to go look at the airplane.
So we had all the navigational gears that they had.
By that time of the war, they had Loran gear, which was also a navigational material.
Here, let's move on to the next photograph.
That's yours and Eddie Rue's first car, right?
Yeah, that was our first vehicle.
And I think we spent...
Maybe $300 on it.
That's what it cost.
But it was neat.
I'd love to have it today because I think it'd be worth a fortune.
And that was taken here, right?
Yeah, that was in Bryan.
You had to come back to school.
Yeah, we were in school.
Okay.
Let's go back now.
That was a platoon that I trained with.
And I was the last man on the right on the bottom.
That's you right there on the bottom right.
And the short people, I tell you, when you were marching, were okay as long as you were walking in your direction.
But when they turned around and started walking where those tall people were on the other end, you almost had to run to keep up with them.
We've got some B-25 pictures here coming up from a book that you have.
This one's a little bit grainy, but this is a B-25 during a strafing run right there.
As you can see, that's below the tree line there.
Yeah.
Over the snow, we've got some a little bit clearer pictures coming up this next picture.
I just I just love this next one coming up.
And I think that we've got it.
There it is.
That's an incredible picture.
That picture is actually even bigger than we can put on our format because it shows the bombs dropping underneath.
But.
That's a formation of B-45s, and that's kind of the formation that you flew in.
There's another angle looking at it.
Pretty impressive right there.
Now, we haven't talked about this yet.
That is your wife, Eddie Ruth, and you.
I believe that's on your anniversary.
This was a picture taken because later on in your retirement, I know that you all had a nursery with a specialty in growing orchids, right?
Well, you know, the strangest part of all this
I was in parts of the world where all this stuff grew.
Never saw it flowering all my life out there in the service anywhere.
And then I worked 10 years in Mexico.
I never saw any orchids down there.
And finally, we had somebody gave us a little plant one time.
And we didn't even know it was an orchid.
We brought it home and it flowered.
Well, we found out it was an orchid.
And from that, why we went crazy.
After I retired, I went back to A&M, took a graduate course in tissue culture to do cloning and this sort of thing.
Right.
And I still do this today.
Yes, sir.
I have a seed bank that goes back for about 40 years.
Right.
And when I retire again, I'm going to start on that seed bank.
That's fantastic.
near the end of the war, but I did want to ask you about where you were when the bomb dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
We were in Malabang in Mindanao, which is a big island in the southern part of the Philippines.
And I think I told you that when they dropped the first bomb, nobody believed it.
Everybody, you know, we dropped 2,000 pound bombs and they made a little waiver in the jungle, but
not big enough to wipe out a whole city.
Right.
And it was pretty hard to phantom that they could have something that would wipe out the entire population of one of these places.
And then after they dropped the second bomb, well, then we got enough information that made it sound more feasible.
Right.
So it was pretty hard to imagine that you could carry something that would liquidate that much space.
Because at the time, I would imagine that your thought was that you would be flying support for a ground invasion in Japan.
Yeah, we would have been.
We would have been.
In fact, that's what we were doing down there, was regrouping and training to go do the invasion.
Indeed.
You finally came home in December of 1945, after the war was over.
You came home on a ship that took about a month.
In January of 1945.
In January, excuse me.
I want you to talk about you came to the west coast and you flew with a friend to Boulder and you bought that friend's father's car, a Model A. Yeah. Tell us what happened after that. Well I spent all my money that I had mustered out with and had to call home to get some money to be able to leave Denver and uh it had snowed. I don't know how much, but it was pretty deep snow up there and we
This guy that I grew up with during the war, we flew together most of the war.
His dad was an old man, and he had a Model A Ford on blocks in a garage.
And he said, let's go see if we can get that thing running.
So we scoured all over Denver to find some retreads to go on it and got it running.
And I left Denver in a snowstorm in that Model A Ford.
and if you've gone from here to Denver, you go through what's called Raton Pass which is a pretty treacherous thing to travel even when it's dry and that old Model A chuggled up that thing like it wasn't anything and everybody else was sliding all over the side of the road and everything else and made it to Dallas in two days. And you're you're bundled up with
I had Marine blankets and a Marine overcoat and everything else because it had an open part of the ceiling.
It rotted off up there, and it was snow and everything coming on the inside.
But made it home.
Going about a max of 40 miles an hour, I guess, right?
Yeah, and I took it to Beaumont.
That's where I was from and got it all cleaned up.
And when I got into A&M, I sold it, which was a big mistake because I sold it because I thought if I came to A&M with it, I wouldn't study.
Right.
But it turned out there were about five cars on the campus in those days.
So you look at it today and you can kind of guess what it would have been like.
Dan, that trip might have been your most dangerous mission of your time away from home was getting from Boulder to Dallas.
It wasn't that bad.
I didn't have any hurry.
You came back to, you attended Lamar in Beaumont for a while and then finally got to A&M, graduated in 49 with...
And entomology was your path.
And I wish we could talk more about that, but we're about to run out of time.
But I want you to talk about your family.
But you did spend some time in Brownsville and in Mexico in entomology.
That was your career.
But I want you to talk about your family.
You have a son and three daughters and, of course, your wife and grandkids and a couple of great-grandkids.
Well, we've been married 60 years, and we had three daughters and three sons.
Yes, sir.
We had two sons that died, one near birth and one at age of about 41 or two years old, maybe.
Excuse me.
And he had epileptic seizures and had a seizure up at the farm when I was there, an unattended seizure, and he suffocated.
Yes, sir.
But anyway, we've got a few grandkids and a couple of great grandkids.
Right.
My wife does Cub Scouts with grandkids.
And I know that you all were very instrumental in the startup of the Brazos Valley Rehabilitation.
We did.
I'm the only charter member still living that was an initial part of that.
And they gave J.O., Alexander, and I, our wives and us were the beginning of it.
But our wives really were the ones that
did the legwork and did most of the work of getting that thing organized to begin with.
Well, it's a wonderful, wonderful facility.
We have a beautiful facility over there next to St.
Joseph's.
Right.
Indeed it is.
We're out of time.
Okay.
Thank you for being here and thank you for your service with the Marines.
Thank you, sir.
Thank you for your service.
Texas A&M class of 1949, Dan Chadbourne, waited until after his service to come to A&M.
where he got that degree.
And then the masters, he and his wife, Eddie Ruth, still live in the home they built in Bryan in 1956.
We salute him for his service as we salute all veterans.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
Join us again next time on Veterans of the Valley.